record. Hi Matt. So I thought we'd start with going back in time a little bit. You were
born in Havana, Cuba, 1943, February, Sunday. It was the second. It was very cold during
World War II. Yes, according to my mother, it was the coldest day that I have been singing
Havana sometime. The temperature dropped to a drastic 55 degrees. And you looked this up. You were
able to go find like the weather and like actually confirm that it was exactly I was one at 2 a.m.
on the world temperature of that time was 55 degrees. It's absolutely increasing by Havana's standards.
Did you parents ever tell you any stories about like what was happening during World War II in Cuba?
Like how was Cuba affected by World War II? How was your parents affected by it? Well Cuba of course
was a strong ally of the US, the global shooter of the US Navy. And you know, I don't know how many
Cuba fought in the very front, but the way I really, very active. And I know that that was the most
and almost the day where there was the biggest battle of the Second World War. The battle
was starting right was the silent global emotions that you had to do so. So I like to say that it
worked two big disasters. It had to be the same way. The same way. The same month. The battle was
starting right. I'm a person. And was there. So they would have, they would have,
Salangrad would have been a big deal for them. Like they, they would have known that this might have
been a turning point in the war at that point. Like there would have been some. I don't know,
I don't know how well known it was everywhere. So certainly very soon it was, once the
Germans began to retreat and going back to the West Poland, like Napoleon did before. It was
pretty clear that that has been an important moment in the war. So let's go back to even before
you were born. What stories, how far can you trace your ancestry back to? Where do you trace it
back to? Well, the where is easy. Yeah. Because as far as I know, both sides for the family,
for my father's side, my mother, were immigrants that came to Cuba from the Canary Islands.
Canary Islands, I said, the Spanish possession in the middle of Africa, because of Africa. And
many poor Spanish in the late 19th or 20th century migrated to the Canary Islands and from there
to the New World. At that point, what was the only colony that Spain had left. So there were
many people from the Canary Islands ancestry in Abane. In Cuba, in general.
Right. So I come to back the, I cannot trace them more than that because I never tried to do
a more direct genealogy where they, where the families came from. So why? I know that,
probably may be pretty decent. I know that my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my grandfather came to Cuba
because he was the youngest of 12 children. And he had absolutely no economic prospects there
with the family. If there was, there was going to be anything he had to be by others,
not by him. So I know that he might get there to Cuba because of that.
Okay. So why would, why would they have left Spain, proper and gone to the Canary Islands? Was
that, was there some promise of the Canary Islands in the Canary Islands? No, I really don't know
the exact answer to that. I do know that whether there was an movement to send people out of the
Canary Islands or it was generalized poverty as it was in Ireland, for example, that,
that, that, all the people from the Canary Islands to come out to Cuba. Now, there were many ways
before all the people from all the parts of Spain that came to Cuba in the pre-inspired centuries.
And usually they were, they were poor people from the Northern Spain. The poor people from the
extreme South, you know, they, they were people might, they were the same kind of change of migration
that you have seen in other parts of Europe. Okay. That is post-exit, the poor, the hungry,
will find something, something that you work. Okay. You know what? So they, so they go from Spain to the
Canary Islands to Cuba and yeah, yeah. Go ahead. And then in Cuba, your, your, your grandfather,
your grandparents, what, what do they do? Like what, what do they, they, they, they, they, they,
they make it there and then what is their life until? Well, my grandfather or my mother's side,
became a grocery store owner and he did his job really well by Cuban standard.
My grandmother and so on, I have six children and six children. So that's more than I know.
On my father's side, I think my father was just, he worked in the field and you know,
like many other people who worked in the club did, he was a cop in Canary, attention, I want point,
but that's how he died of very young, middle of a type 4 epidemic. And that first,
my father did become the very winner of the family of Asia 6. Did you, did you say it was sugar cane
that he was picking or cotton? No, it's not cotton in Cuba. You just sugar, just all sugar. So what,
the wild crops with the main thing that the main cash crop in Cuba was sugar. Now, as I understand,
picking sugar cane can be very sort of dangerous. It was dangerous. It was very time consuming,
I'm very tired, tired of some. There is an art to calling a big stock of cane and you know,
you could get several legs in the corner because of the cornering is down and so on. But the hidden
entire diet of time for Cuba, there was an epidemic in the 19, let's see, I can't tell you
almost exactly what it was because my father was born 1909 and he became the very winner in 1916.
So it was more or less of that time when he went to my grandfather died.
So if I'm doing some quick math, that means your dad went to work at age 7?
Six or seven, yes. He was, he had, well, to round up the story, there were six of them,
two boys and four girls. There was an aunt or their family that once had a mother made that had
some money and he said he could take only two of the children and he took the elder, the older
stool, my uncle and one of my aunts. So my father was left to take care of his mother and his three
older him and six of us. Wow. And he said, my grandmother or my mother and my father's side was
frail and never worked a day in her life. So it couldn't support the family. So my father had to do
that. So I know eventually he became, he drove taxis. Is that when he started out doing first or did
he, no, no, he went, he had my father always been very hard work to call. He didn't have an
education. He only went to school like a semester. So he learned to write, to read and write,
but he has very limited education. So he was very smart. Now he ultimately, while he was doing
at a time that passed through power, he was, he worked for Shailault Company. He was an assistant
geologist, assistant to a geologist. He was a geologist and there were, there were people
for the centuries or in the mountains in South Park, Cuba. And when the rebels began to show
him up and having five rounds and never go today, went back to Havana and Shaila ultimately
told that the situation was still dangerous and they closed shop in 1957. And my father was
left behind. Actually, when father was offered to go, the farmer he told us to Marakaewo to
Venezuela, I do have gone to Venezuela in 1957, but he didn't want to leave. Then he's
going to become a taxor-can-braver. Oh, okay. All right. So if he came to Taxi Drive,
only after it became impossible to... Yeah, right. Yeah. So you're... Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. The reason we were well-being job for somebody who was not located,
who was working for Shailault for a few years in the 1950s.
Because then he was left again, back to San Francisco, to square one.
And your mother wanted to leave and go to Venezuela and he said no. He wanted to stay because of the
house, the business, or he just didn't want to leave. He didn't have business. He wanted to keep
the family together. Yeah. Remember, he had three old-martig sisters that he took care of still
after all those years. And he was a guy who was a guy who was a guy who was still alive and very
frail. So in 1957, there was no way he could live pure. And that's what he said, what we say.
All right. So let's go back just a little bit before... Let's go before World War II,
just real quick with your dad. So he does all kinds of jobs, but eventually he gets a job or
Shell hires him. And this is all before World War II or not, or is this after World War II?
I don't know. I'm not sure. I think he began working for Shailault for 50s.
Okay. So, okay. Well, he was doing between 1916 and 1950s. I'm clear to me because
on every his course, I know he had a number of jobs relating to working in the agriculture.
Right. He had... And that's why he was doing. But as I said, he was very smart, man.
And he could do better. And he ultimately, I think he may have been hired to drive
our first by Shell. And then he became an assistant to the Yolts this time. He was doing fairly well
for somebody who had an education on to the Shailault to stay away.
Did he ever tell you any stories? Did you ever hear any stories about World War I or the Great
Depression? How did it impact? Well, I just heard a few stories from both sides of the family
about the Great Depression. Did you think of the Depression? The Depression was
higher in the US because it was more harder in Cuba. Because Cuba depended on its
scale or sugar in the world market and the price went down to almost nothing.
Right. And so there was a big, big period of great pain, economic pain in Cuba in the 19...
late 1920s, early 1930s. And people kept on talking about it even to be the day I was
blowing up. Although it's hard times. Very hard times.
Was it... And did you ever talk about how then World War II happens and then maybe the economy
bounces back? Oh, the economy wants back immediately. They wanted to work into the world
of food and like the economy in the US was benefiting from the war, they conquered
into a benefit as well because we began supplying sugar to the allies to the US and to the other
countries. So there was an economic trend at times they had during the war because of that.
All right. So the war happens. You're born during the war. You're a wartime baby.
I was a pre-generation ex. I was a wartime baby. Yes.
And did you... Did your parents ever talk about like, you know, how... I'm sure there were shortages
because it's World War II. Did they ever talk about how, you know, you're... they're raising a
two-year-old or a one-year-old during a war? Was that an event for them? Was it harder, easier?
That conversation never took place in my hearing. I am minding it must have been hard not because
the economic conditions were bad because they weren't growing. So there was a general...
difficult to find in everything because I think we're not in such good supply because
we're in a ration and everything else. The thing that were happening in the US during the war,
what reflected in Cuba? Cuba rationed, they rationed the food too.
Yeah. Sure. Yeah. All right. So you're born and then...
And then so it's the 40s, it's the late 40s, early 50s, and you don't go to the public school.
That's confusing. What are schools like in Cuba? Like in the...
Well, I had that alone. That's a long story, but I don't make it short.
They say public education in Cuba was very bad. Yeah.
Like nobody wanted to send their children to a public school if they could help it.
And I would have had to vote because we didn't have the means to pay for it. However, I was
in a kindergarten. I went to a very, very small local two-room school near my house.
And the owner of that school was a man who had some economic means and an education.
And he had been educated at this plastic private school in Town for one of our co-workers,
which you just need to have on. He was told by my teacher who I had a lot of fair with,
Ms. Lino North. She loved me. I had loved her. And she told her how good I was and how smart I was,
and so on. And he invited me to his house. I remember it this day. My mother and I went and it was
nothing like what I had done my life. It was a big house in the country with cows and sheep and
everything else. The big TV was a mobile theater time. So it was a great experience. I
really got to like me. He took it from his head to go to the school where he had a letter from
and took to the priest's random spot. I had to look at this piece. It's good.
And the interview, and I think I have to tell you one of my few gifts in life is that I interview well.
Okay. And I met with us Chris and I somehow saw myself and the other news scholarship.
And I went to that school from the fourth grade to the version of high school three on scholarship.
And the only condition that person is that I was not to tell anybody that I was on scholarship
because if I wanted to be treated as well or the same as all the other rich kids that were going
there. But they must have known you were not rich, right? Yeah, but one thing is knowing that you're
not rich and the other thing is knowing that you're there. That kind of school was very progressive.
They have a section of the school was devoted to vision free kids who couldn't afford to.
But there were like second class citizens. They had a class in a separate place with different
teachers and so on. So I presume that anyone who had any doubts as to whether I
how I was getting my education would not have thought that I was a forwarded kid because I will
have sent downstairs as opposed to when with a rich kid upstairs. But anyhow, that's the way
went. I went I was free of charge it all my way to high school. And then I got a scholarship
to go to college. So I was going to college to college to. Before we get there, so Tom, I want to
hear about. So you and you graduated high school in 1960. So then so then you're you're in high
school during the late 50s and you're in middle school in the 50s. Tell me about the music.
Tell me about music that you're listening to music. Yeah. Oh, that's an interesting story.
There was no more music in my family, okay? Yeah, no very much music. However,
we are living in a house in which I didn't have a separate bedroom. I had we had like a family
room where I have a desk and where I sat at my homework and so on. It was a good accommodation
except for the fact that before women in the house talking at the same time, they know it was
absolutely on the road. And I couldn't concentrate to work. So I began playing the radio looking
for music. It gives the ground a cow. Yeah, okay? And I made an interesting discovery. Most
cool and listen to you are the popular dance music at all. That music is good for your feet,
but it's not good for studying. So I began turning through the dial and I came across a station that
was plastic and music 24 hours a day. And that's how I got into music and I developed a taste of
plastic and music when I was I'm most excited when I was nine, okay? All the kids were listening to
South Star or whatever and I was listening to Mozart and Beethoven because that's how I could
study to tell what tell me about this. So what was the radio like that you were using that you used?
Oh, it was a comedy. Well, later some people who left you gave us a very good
feeling to show wave radio. We gave a reception and so on. But the other one that I have when I was
going over just come on. We give AAMFM. Actually, I don't even know if they had FM. I radio that you
go by for a series or any place for you know, a few bucks. And so are you the only one listening?
So what's everybody else listening to rock and roll dance music?
Well, I actually find my role, for example, over younger because he didn't have the
10th program. He grew up listening to Q and popular music and another thing that you need to
understand is that American music reached Q about the same time in reaching the US.
I will tell you for example that I was listening to rock and roll the clock at the same time
that people in New York and probably are listening to it. Okay. So that's sort of I did
when I improved my listening ability. I just began listening to American music like everybody else did.
Yeah. When do you learn to speak English so well and fluently?
Well, they began, I began getting English training in court date.
It was on the end. I learned English for the most of high school. Was that unique because you
were at a Catholic school? Were that have happened in the public school? Well, theoretically,
everybody had to learn English. And in fact, the English was a required discipline.
Yeah. The way that the educational system was, it was that even though you could attend a private
school, in order to graduate, you have to take exams that were administered by the public schools.
So for example, I had some of my English course when I was in test rate by a very nice woman
who thought many questions in English and talked to her interview with me in English from the
public schools. So the answer is yes, you have to be high to take English. Very few people
learned you well. I actually did when I was in the situation, we got getting involved in Cuba.
I did what many other kids did. There were little neighborhood schools that taught English and
night English as a second language. And I complemented why I have already learned from my
stories in the flu by going taking those classes at night. And those were very helpful because my
teacher in my school, high school, was very good to have worked in New York. We were used to work
on a basis. It was excellent teacher who had come to grammar and everything else. We had a 30
I took my action from him. And going to that English I think the language I was listening to
learning from a woman who had a perfect English and I think that helped me a little bit to improve
it. But at the time I got away with people high school, I was for years, I had been reading,
I got a statistic, all this literature in English. So I mean, I had no problem making that
translation point. I came to transition from Cuba to the West, the 90s. That was a problem.
Because I had learned all that before I left you.
What was the sense? I feel like there's a representation of Cuba in the 1950s,
a popular representation of it as being almost like another US state.
That Americans went there. It was easy to go to. It was only whatever certain amount of time from
Florida. Did you, were there a lot of Americans floating around at that time?
Or not? Or you?
The answer is yes. Let me give you an example. I was reading yesterday. That the first
spheres of work and company outlet outside the US, working to in Habana, 1942.
I bought it while the time was up. There was, I used to do more shopping at the Tencent store,
the World War Wombers. There were the spheres. There were so many Americans
establishment in Habana that you could get American dues.
But as far as people, it was very common for Americans
of all classes who come to Cuba. It was very cheap, as far as for Miami to Habana.
It was a Latin cheap, when you want to, but they are compared to the US,
to a more expensive city in the US. The Cubans love Americans.
And Americans love the Cubans. It was a great thing. One of the great crimes of revolution
is that difference Cubans from the natural friends of Americans.
Do you know this? One of the first
efforts made Cuba independent countries to escape from Spain was originated by people
who were from Cubans who were in the US, who were back from turning Cuba into a new,
or new American state, going to have Cuba join the US.
And this effort was very heavy in the South because Cuba has labelled
the most of the slave states had. So they wanted to have Cuba become a slave state to join
all the South. That's what many people worked for over here in the US. It didn't happen
for many reasons. But you know, that was, that was by ground even then about how
making Cuba really partly US. And when Cuba, when the world independent
and the US occupied Cuba, there was a lot of effort or a lot of talk about trying to see we could
get Cuba to become a state that's supposed to be coming independent countries.
But Cuba's only having a part of it.
I see you have in the background, Havana, you told me before the interview started.
How far was that from your parents' home? And how did you get there? And how often did you go
into Havana? Oh, I lived in Havana. I lived in a poor neighborhood in Havana.
Oh, it was like the suburbs of Havana or was it? Yeah, yeah, yeah.
The one thing Cuba had was many Cuba, I think the Cuba had at the time, the
revolution to go, but that where I was standing or unique was Cuba had an excellent both system,
excellent public transportation system. So, when I was born and began growing up, it was just,
you know, it was a streetcar. But it went 10 to 10 to go into the 50s and you could go from any point
to Havana to another point in relatively little time. And from my house in where I lived in my
neighborhood, there were like five different bus lines that I could take to go to different parts of
Havana and all the parts of Cuba in the general area. That's convenient. Across the street from my
house, the street on where my house lay, there was a boat route number 11 that I could have
taken there. They were able to have the traffic because of all the places, but you know,
with a couple of blocks away, there were like five different lines away.
What was the neighborhood you were in called? Did it? It was coal and it's called Luyano. It is a,
it was a, L-U-Y-A-N-O. And the name came from a, a river that used to run over there,
a little creek, of course, a reason called Anemia Nailo, a no-trick. And that's where it took it from.
It was for good core worker kind of a, a, a, ambient. If you remember, I told you that
when my, my grandfather died, two of my aunts, uncles were picked up by a, a sister aunt.
The sister aunt, when she died, she only helped and she left with two, her niece,
through my aunt La Olina. And she became the owner of the house and we are known. That's where we all
lived. My father, my mother, the aunt, my grandmother, all lived there. So, but that was like a,
10, 15 minutes bus drive to the center of Havana. To like, what's in the background of the,
10 minutes to there? That's not, is that right? Well, that, that, that, that's not the part of Havana,
it's closest to it. Yes, that, that, that isn't the, that isn't the core of the coast, right? And
the center of Havana is a little further down. But, yeah, yeah, we've got a cori, we have been
by bus, 20, 25 minutes bus drive. Did you ever take in, did the family ever go to, to, to the United
States? Did you ever take a trip? No. I thought you're in 50's, my father had their opportunities to
get to live few while he will undo it from the relations. But no, but just to, just to take a vacation,
just, you never, we were at the poor. I mean, the vacation was on the reach. The rich Americans
who come to queue anytime, you had to be a rich queueer. Yeah. To be able to come to the US,
and many people came to the morning, came to the, they came to shop, they came to time fund,
they came to Miami to shop. Okay. But poor people like us, we, we, we had that option. Right.
Would you go on? Would you ever take trips within Cuba? Go to the south or different parts?
There were, yeah, there was, I didn't go too far. Yeah. But I would go to, probably as, the farthest
east I went from Havana was like, probably a hundred miles. This, the island is, Cuba is a very
long island. It is the size of Pennsylvania. You take Cuba and you present it in the square.
You become exactly the same size and population of Pennsylvania. So it's a relatively big country.
But it was a very long, for one end to the other or Cuba was like, you know,
I, I 800 miles maybe, or one end, if you were to put an end of Cuba in New York,
the people Cuba would go by Chicago. Wow. Very, very long, not right. So it was long enough to fit
between New York and Chicago, which in real, to extend. So how different was, so you're basically
suburban slash urban? How different was, how different was urban Cuba from rural Cuba in the 50s?
Well, I didn't know much about Cuba because I said don't visit there. I wanted to visit
my grandmother on my mother's side still lived. I'm also my aunt on my mother's side still lived
in a small town. I would never wear my blush. I would wear my train. And I was so,
I was by train for Habana. And I went there and the cookies I was beautiful. Yeah. I went to some,
my father took me on some rides to some nice parts of Cuba both size, Habana, West and East.
Yeah. He was, but I, the life of the rural, the people in the country, I know that from
here was, I know that for example, people west of Habana in the west of most growing,
many of them were involved in growing tobacco. That's what it meant to tobacco from that far
a queue of came. That was the one that became well and all over the world. So where's the sugar
cane being grown everywhere or is that a specific region to? Well, it was grown everywhere.
It started, the sugar cane started out after Habana. But then expanded throughout the entire
country. And it was, it became the number one industry and the main source of livelihood in Cuba.
And it was grown, we have, no, in the last number like 102 of mills,
five mills all over the different parts of the country. Right.
You're going to Catholic school. What's your, what's your little brother Mario? Is that,
did I get that right? Yeah, doing what? What's he doing?
Yeah, but is there Mario also, my family, that, when my brother, if she was four years younger than I
was, yeah, my father and mother made a decision that they were no matter how much sacrifice they
had to do, my brother would get exactly the same education I was getting. So they don't know how
they're managed because they couldn't really afford to. I probably went to the same school,
but we pay for him. They pay for it. He didn't have a scholarship. He had to, we had to have
his pay for him. Okay. So he had the same education. I thought he'd
through high school. What books are you reading? What books do you like? What are the early
books that hooked you on literature? Do you remember? Oh, well, I can tell you. I was, I was reading
all the novel where typical of a young American, I guess, reading, British Island and all those
students and all these other, I mentioned novels. When I was in about ninth grade, more or less,
I branched into leadership both in Spanish and English. And then every kind of things more serious
and really in a way, I think I'm reading an envelope of the British authors and so on,
and the French and Spanish and so on. But I started out like, in the US, I just
recieved reading kind of things like that, or the swan-buckling novels. So what did you like?
You like the pirate adventure story? That was a... Well, that's
