Hello, Matt. Thank you for being here this evening.
Hello.
I wanted to follow up with just a few questions about Cuba.
I was thinking about the school that you went to, that you got the scholarship that you graduated from, valid a tutorial from.
I think you said that after...
What do you call it? Do you just say after Castro took power? Do you say after the communist took power? What do you say there?
Well, I don't know if I was referring to it.
Like in 1960, when...
1960, 1960.
The Castro was in power, having been involved for a year and a half.
So you just...
Yeah, go ahead, sorry.
But then, at that point, it proceeded to close down the private schools that were open, including the ones that I got wait before that happened in the summer after the election.
So, technically my graduation in 1960 was the last year of the school that was subsequently closed.
So, were most of the private schools also religious Catholic schools or no?
No, no, they were probably... In fact, they were a number of high schools that were America-Rone and they were...
They were... They were... They were not religious at all.
And there were some private schools that were pretty good that were also not religious.
What's your family religious?
Not really. Okay. One of my others very involved.
Yeah.
Because the rest of the family was religious and very dignified.
I don't think my family was religious at all.
My mother was religious at the point.
It was... The choice of going to a school like the one I went to was to fall first, when you able to fall.
What am I just getting scarced?
And say, one of them has very quality instruction.
It has nothing to do with the religious denomination of the school as such.
So, in other words, the fact that I went to a religious and Catholic school was not taken by being the biggest hour at all.
So, and what impact did this... I'm still mixed up with it.
So, does anybody call it like a communist takeover?
Like, what do people call it at the time? Do you remember?
Like...
What point are you talking about?
I was in this design. It was not a... It was a revolution.
It was a revolution.
The expectation was that we would follow by elections over the next year's show, period of time.
And you know, caste would be done saying, why do we need elections?
And then it was not... It didn't declare himself to be Marxist until 1960.
We only have a period of power.
So, you call it whatever you want, but it depends on what type of period of time there's talking about.
In 1959, it was no call a communist regime.
He already knew it was becoming a communist regime.
He didn't become a communist regime on the cast on house that it was.
He knew it well.
So, he comes to power as just sort of like... He's saying maybe he's a liberator or something like that, but not a Marxist.
He... He... His first few speeches after taking power, he declared himself to be democratic...
...properly democratic rule.
And I also have been holding elections soon, and sometimes the next period.
And you know, this, because of the young people, he began by failing that attitude control of all the institutions you were.
And were you and your family surprised by the backpedaling, or did you expect that?
Well, depends on what the problem we're talking about.
I was surprised because I was... I gave him the benefit of the doubt that it could be for quite some time.
But father, after his first speech, they declined. He's going to think you were.
So, my father was a surprise at all. He could speak from the very beginning.
I don't know how he managed to be... He had almost clairvoyant.
And I... I asked him about father for the first few months, saying, you are really no good-fair as someone before.
He was... He was trying to help us out.
So, Casra was never democratically elected in any sense?
No, no, no, no.
What? If we had having elections that day, if it did not, he would have won.
Or he would have hold it.
So, he never had any elections. He was elected to anything.
And his support base was in the countryside, not in the cities, right? Or no?
Well, you have to understand that people were in cled.
People in the city supported him because they thought he was a different person than he was.
People in the cities like myself, and the first supported him because we thought he was a liberal democratic person who was going to bring two of you back on the mainstream.
So, the support for him was between the over time, was by those people who thought that he was for Q and E.
We didn't have to look on the whole of the city, was what you expect the hint to be.
And the expectation at the beginning was that he was going to be finally taking you up for the democratic party.
After the coup, after the coup, after the coup, that was what the basis for his support was.
After worse, you know, people who were sentenced to regime, let the country or when they came, they came out to the post of him.
And the ones that we came to support their still, were the people who were either coming to start with, or were just that minus to adhere to the role of the mayor of the United States.
And you were there, you witnessed all this. So, what would you say to somebody to people who say that this experiment that Castro starts would have possibly succeeded had the US not interfered that, you know, people, you know, in part blame the United States for, or do you think that had very little to do with that?
Well, it's just a big, it is, it's not a good thing to question the part of what the reality is.
Yeah, at the beginning, the US government was embarrassed by being supportive of this before, it was a supportive castle.
And they were trying to work with it.
What happened was ultimately, as Castro began doing strange things like inviting the Vice Chairman of the Communist Party with the US to do it.
They were being clear why he was trying to do. He began by confiscating forms and later he began by taking over private and private, so on.
They were really trying to put this crew on Cuba until the American properties in Cuba, which were many billions of dollars were taken over the one I analyzed and that happened in 1960.
So, late 1960. So, the US was not responsible for the penalty of raising, what, what, that was the gracing of coming into the world. He's on choice.
He was not forced to do that by anyone. And in fact, he could have done anything he wanted to do with Cuba when he took power because he had gun kicked.
We gave him a gun check and he did, he did with it, but he wanted to do, which is a school, a humanitarian state equation where he was an enrower.
So, that's the idea that the US, what is the US reaction? They have to react, so the part of the reason has to react is because they have been confiscated.
And the US has to be confiscated. And the US has to be confiscated.
Were you pretty shocked when the, when you know an alliance with the Soviet Union happened? Was there any inclination in Cuba before that?
Like, did Cuba have any connections to the Soviet Union pre-castor or no?
No, what's the way? No, what's the way? Okay. There was an effect of first portions of the Cuba where very strange people, we look at them and we very same.
I remember very well that the first thing, the first indication of what Soviet Union would do for Cuba was they had an institution of the Soviet culture and the queer living and the sure, it was all apartment.
I don't want to report last week because it looked like four people have to be Cuba. So they were not going to give anything that was that I was going to Cuba.
But to ask you a question, there was absolutely no connection or link or any desire to have link to Cuba and Russia before Catherine invited the name.
And before you left in 63, we're so, we're so it's coming to the country. Would you have seen Russians just hanging around by 63 or no?
Of course, you should have to 60. Yeah. After they began having ties with Russia, not only Russian, but people from all over that alike on this game.
I saw polls and checks and experiments and so on in Cuba. And the way you could tell almost where they were from because each had different personality and different distinctive look.
The checks were well dressed, very polite. These Germans were essentially ruined and the Russians looked like they were provocacative.
The people that they think to Cuba, they didn't get any attention on where what I would have considered to be look all our workers, I suppose, the way they think of themselves.
We for the Soviet for them. We for the Soviet for the Russians, they were coming because they're living in a queer house in a very hard time.
I don't know. Would you like to share anything else about the Soviet or the Soviet? What would you call it? The Sovietization of Cuba?
Well, there was never a such a new relation. Not a Soviet invasion like the like a Russian a rustle vacation like of.
They are the Russian didn't turn that many Russians to Cuba as such. It was expected to have Russians come to Cuba.
There was that came where military advisors of people had to do with this one way or another working with justice.
There was not a massive influence of Russians in Cuba. For one thing that the Russians could not afford to become a citizen, Cuba.
There were not tourists coming to Cuba for any of the satellites because not only people in this country could afford to the cause of a vacation in Cuba.
The people who came to Cuba on vacation were French and Italian and Argentinian, were not people from the Soviet Union or the war.
So what's things really heat up? You know, Bay of Pigs, post Bay of Pigs. Did you feel any or notice any economic hardships or changes to Cuba?
Did things get worse? How fast did things get worse?
Well, they can't work much faster than that. But in 1960s, the hell of relations with the fascinator, you had a racial card or a racial book.
And that's just like having very limited access to things like five weeks or more or seriously.
Yeah, really. It started back in 1960s and started by a deterrent of the war, the regime war.
So five weeks a month?
Yes, five weeks a month. You had a little kid, he could get milk.
No, only I think you offered him milk on the U.S. child of three years.
Like, third, it was very strict rationing even then.
And nothing to do with Bay of Pigs, it was started as I say, in 1960s.
What happened is that Cuba began losing market and when the U.S. caught around by insured from Cuba, the impact was also severe.
People, the government had a redundation.
I was settled to buy one pair of shoes between 1961 and I had time to elect Cuba.
Okay. I didn't want to wear a Versus.
Do you remember being hungry? Was that hunger?
Well, it depends on how you find hunger. We didn't eat well. We kept on eating worse hours.
People manage always to get something and you have to buy in the back market if you could get it as far.
But I don't remember it would be going to bed starving.
Well, I don't remember feeling well fed at all after I think so if you want.
So, how quickly does the black market set up?
At the very beginning, because Cuba happened was that they were never really gotten around.
I don't think it could.
So, they cover entirely all the private owned more farms in Cuba.
Okay. The farmers were the last three entrepreneurs in Cuba.
And the farmers would bring their folks, bring their books, which was pretty much made.
We saw in Havana, many of them, some precinctiously, the black market and so on.
That's how many people had to get some of the basic things to supplement the little little little little gain.
Okay. If you're up for it, you went to camp Metacombay. Is that right?
I did not like brother.
You brother wanted.
Where did you go?
No, no, no, I can't with my parents. I go to him time in May of May 22nd, 1963. I didn't go to any camp.
So, what did you did your brother ever describe it to?
He's glad to meet.
Yeah.
The camp. Yeah.
He didn't want to talk about it.
So, it was that bad.
He was 15 years old.
And he was different.
He was a very important person for having to be there.
Yeah.
First because theoretically, the camp was a book to go there together.
And then a job I was to put him on the same school or whatever.
It was 15 years old.
That was the first book by a bank.
The comment was that the ad that also came to come to the state was supposed to keep him until the family came or whatever.
And he knew that you put him into the camp.
And third, you know, the camp was a particular.
He was a nice thing to do for thousands of cute kids that were there with the family.
But it was not.
It was not a.
A summer camp for the quality.
Right.
It was the second to do.
Right. And he was by himself.
I he was very angry with all the staff.
I either want to talk about it.
I'm not going to talk about it.
I'm not going to talk about it.
I'm not going to talk about it.
All right.
All right.
All right.
Three mile island.
So just.
What were you doing on three mile island?
What was your assessment of what happened there?
And.
Yeah.
Okay.
We have to understand the follow.
The actual thing by line was.
What was your assessment of what the.
I had no.
I was the first person.
100% mechanical failure.
And it.
A percent of the other.
Because they have.
They have no clue what going on.
The one doing the wrong thing.
What could have been.
They made a couple of hours.
And I have to be a major disaster.
Or a part.
Potentially major disaster.
It didn't get to be made a computer.
Make a computer.
Well in the client.
But that.
That was a.
that the moment they actually took place,
so will indeed, the investigations of the action
and the investigation to find out why
that happened, whose fault it was,
perhaps it was to fix it as well.
And there were at 1.3 or 4 concurrent investigations,
the didn't have a commission appointed by the President
of the U.S. as it was,
and I don't know if the commission
or no investigation done by the two-pronged regulatory
commission that was a regulator for the class.
There was an investigation by the State of Presidenia.
And I think there was even another one, but I don't remember.
Anyhow, all those things were going well at the same time.
And the investigation meant that the U.S.
the investigation of the investigators
would send people to the site to interview employees
and the management and type of program was going on
and it got to come on the floor.
And they were in the form of interviews
that became essentially like litigation, the position.
Yeah.
So they accompanied all of the reaction.
I was front of the one who licensed the class
and we had me and all the lawyers
who were from the wall there,
with secret investigation to assist the employees
even to the position that they put on the floor.
So that's what I was going myself.
By the time, did you actually go in the plant?
No, they went in the plant.
The plant goes close because of the relation there
with the site.
Oh, so the plant shut down permanently then.
Oh yeah.
Yeah.
Okay, so you never were like there.
So you were fine theoretically.
Well, I think I may have to do this story
but I'm telling you again.
If that plant they have already trailers
that were used for various purposes.
Yeah.
And I think they said that offices have to react.
I was in a trailer that was just about
their feet from the plant that had the action.
So by the way, I was looking at it
when I was in the middle.
Very close to it, but you know, not quite.
I, I, I, I station, a battery or little plant on the windowsill
to make sure that the field of the radiation escape
I would, the whole jet I would stay silent
for a minute and then I think that was the plant.
They will get in the tool to rule the tool.
They would be sick.
They will be fortunate.
And they never did just that kind of variety.
Nothing happened.
So I never was, and of course they give you
once you are there in linear device or the simulator
that tells you how much radiation
for sure you don't have for being there.
I might never do anything.
So I knew I was safe.
I was never quite at risk.
But because I wasn't, I wasn't in the plant.
The more people in the guy who were going to site
trying to fix it, that was a different story.
But the people who were just talking to the regulators
who were doing the hassle of the day.
During this, when you're, you know, first year
an engineer, then a lawyer, are you writing
while you're also doing this like a, or is that later in life?
Well, the answer is, the answer is complicated.
I always had the style to write.
I never really had the opportunity
and you know, being an engineer and a lawyer
who was very little room for that.
When I was going for my PhD, our higher state,
in the 1967, 1970 period, I made friends with,
and two people, three members of the Cuban community.
One of them was, so my age was getting a PhD in the Spanish
in the Roman language department of Ohio State.
He invited me with a teacher's concurrence
to sit on the classes that I was taking.
And I was a big image, because there were
nothing American laboratories for the native,
for the native day, I don't know now,
because I'm a phone, so of course,
there was a fascinating thing.
It was a combination of the leadership
and the official was very good.
And I really became a research.
I wrote one or two things while I was there
and that period of time.
One of the stories, my first story,
I never found it, it's still called loss.
The second story, I found it the other day,
I tried to very publish now, because it was good enough.
Even though I was reading my 269 to the publisher,
I could publish it until you know, that it is.
But I didn't really get seriously into writing
until I retired for my low degree,
because I have time to my hand.
I'm not in particular important to do so,
I had a lot of anxiety.
And that's how I wanted to do it.
And that was very little, very,
the actual activity was required
to become a writer on the data, when I was 16.
You do remember at all what that first story was about?
Oh yeah, I remember well,
because the laboratory had a chemical mix.
You got published shortly after the gun published.
We had to do with many of my stories come out in green.
And I had a very big green, which I was looking up
to remember the mochi.
We had to do with it.
It was one of these things about alien invasion,
E-L-O, but you know, and we had to do with this alien
that was investigating the U.S. and the world,
and trying to eliminate the human race
by a very clever and tricky way,
which is, in fact, the world's applied with a chemical
that will make women's cells.
So there's three of them, two generations
that will bring the world to life,
and they will take over a war and welcome it.
So I wrote a story about that,
and I think it's not going pretty good.
And I told it to my friends about who,
by that time was already a tenial professor in the university.
And he said, definitely that's the end of the story.
They reported to my class to see what they say.
And the students loved it.
I said, well, okay, I'm going to send it out.
And you're doing your post immediately,
but when you think most of it out,
what am I better story, exactly?
That was my first story.
Do you keep a no-ped, like next year, bed,
because you...
No, no, I don't think I just remember since my...
And sometimes, I get caught in the day.
It doesn't take too many days.
Not always, oh my, oh my, it's a different time.
But this one came out in one piece.
When I dreamed I had, I remember in the morning,
I said, that's just a good idea.
I mean, the aliens had a good idea.
I hope the story of what it would be a good thing for.
And I did write it.
I'm the president, so that was actually
one of my better stories that I don't want to admire anyone.
It was called, there is something in the water.
What was it?
So, yeah, there's something in the water, yeah.
Yeah, it's a fact.
And to show that I have just been a lawyer of the research,
it was a very interesting format
because I wrote it as a report written by an investigator
a transitive officer in the review of the person.
The main character of the story is an Indian,
American Indian, who was a nuclear deal, this bar.
It was other opening, the doors of the National Park.
And he was witnessing all these strange people coming in.
And it was finally realized that there was something
most of the things going on.
And what there were also, so he said,
they would agree with the fire and kill them.
Okay, so he got arrested then and the interview of this guy
was, when the story was over, that's how it came along.
All right, all right, man, I'm gonna stop here.
We still have to do one more about all your writing,
but they're gonna want this room back
because I'm in far as bedroom.
