T: Terrence Corrigan Interviewer
M: Mat Interviewee

T: Mat, first question, can you tell me about one historical moment you have witnessed?
M: Well, the historical moment that I remember the most, unfortunately, was January 1, 1959, when
Batista fled Cuba and Castro took power. It was an earth shaking event for everybody. I was in Cuba at the time, I remembered till today.
M: Thank you. What or who is the oldest ancestor you know about? And what stories do you know of them?
M: Well, the only ancestor that I know about were my grandfathers and my grandmother on
both sides of the family. Ok. The lines go further back, but I don't know them. I had an aunt who really was very well versed on these things, but she never conveyed it to me. 
T: And what is there a story of any of your grandparents that you remember fondly?
M: My grandfather on my mother's side was a very interesting man.
He was the youngest of 12 children, came from the Canary Islands.
Of course, being the youngest, he cared, not only for the state of the family or anything,
I don't even know how much, but he wouldn't get anything.
So he had to migrate to Cuba.
And he came to Cuba, he became the owner of a grocery store, and he did very well over
the years.
So I remember fondly the few times that I saw him, he died when I was 16.
So he didn't leave in Havana, as I did.
So I only visited him sporadically.
T: And he was?
M: Yeah.
He is, the oldest ancestor that I can tell you that I remembered that had stories to tell.
You see, my grandfather, on my father's side died very young from Typhus, Typhoid fever.  And he left my father at six years old to be the social worker of a family, my father had to
cut cane at the age of six to support his family.
So I don't know him, I never met him.
My grandmother, on my mother's side, was very sweet, very nice lady, very lovely.
And she, I met her and she lived a little bit longer than my grandfather.
My grandmother, on my father's side, had always had a disease. 
And she died again when I was in my teens, so she was 75.
So that's the older ancestors.
And as I said, the one I remembered the most was my grandfather, on my mother's side.
T: Thank you.
What was your favorite food from your childhood?
Do you remember?
M: Well, I tell you what, my mother was a very different cook.
But there was one thing she did well.
It was, you know, a famous Cuban Chicken dish.
Arroz con pollo.
And she did a very good, arroz con pollo.
But she was pretty bad elsewhere.
My aunt Maria on the other hand, couldn't cook for her life.
But she made a bake, she was the greatest baker.
Then what I remembered most about my childhood food was a dessert that Aunt Maria made.
She made wonderful flans and puddings and cakes.
Everything she was wonderful.
T: This is not on my list.
But have you ever tried to recreate any of these recipes by any chance?
M: Fran tried.
T: Yeah.
M: Because my aunt Maria gave it to me.
And of course, they didn't write their recipe, their steps.
But my Fran consulted with Aunt Maria and she knew how to make flan.
And she made a decent flan.
It was never as good as Aunt Maria.
Never.
In fact, I never tasted the flan as good as hers.
T: Wow.
That's a good flan then. 
M: Yeah.
Yeah, I had many flans in my life.
Aunt Maria's was the best.
T: OK.
M: And you ask her, how to do this?
she said, well, put in a little of this, put a little of that.

T: So no written recipe, just all eyeball, sort of just like.
M: Right.
She didn't write anything just eyeball.

And that was the way it was done then, it was conveyed orally.
The people who wrote books were few and far between.
Particularly then.
T: Yeah.
Yeah.
It's the recipes that were passed down by story, for sure.
One more question.
Describe your memories of September 11, 2001.
M: I remember it very well.
T: Yeah.
M: For this reason, I was in the office.
And we were having meetings at the office at 10 o'clock.
And the meeting was interrupted when
somebody came and had the radio on and gave the news.
Something terrible has happened.
So everything shut down and I had to get home.
And it took me almost an hour and a half or two hours.
The typical ride from the office to the house is 20 minutes.
But it took me over an hour because all the roads were closed or clogged.
And I had to know my way.
I would be driving by the Pentagon.
T: Right.
M: Of course, that road was closed because of the attack on the Pentagon.
T: So how close are you to the Pentagon normally?
Just not physically.
I wasn't that close it is over a mile.
But the ride between my office in Washington to my house in Alexandria took me across
the bridge next to the Pentagon.
And that road was closed for hours.
Wow.
OK.
All right.
So let me ask you, let's see, which question.
Let me ask you.
I'll ask you the September 11th question.
Can you answer that?
Again, describe your memories of September 11th.
Can you answer that in Spanish?
Sure.  
[end of edited transcription]
The September 11th afternoon was closed.
I was flying.
I was working in a kitchen.
I arrived at the farm, but I was always there.
And I had a meeting scheduled for 10am that morning.
And in the middle of the meeting, a secretary came to introduce me.
And he was passing something terrible.
And everyone put the radio on the television.
And we were all in the working task.
And naturally, the officer took me on the plane.
And he had to go back to my house.
And he took me around a hour and a half.
And the officer arrived at the house, in part of it,
because the carriages were closed.
Thank you.
Thank you, Matt.
